README.md, before:

# Project: Code Institute January 2022 Hackathon with SODA Social: Mindfulness and Wellbeing

![](static/images/jan-2022-hackathon-image.png)

# Team: 09

# Table of Contents

## Introduction

This website is a project for Code Institute's January 2022 Hackathon, hosted in collaboration with digital recruitment firm SODA and their networking event SODA Social. The theme of the Hackathon was mindfulness and wellbeing in the workplace. 

The website was created by Naoise Gaffney, Marina Pavlovic, Goran Kuzma, Eva Kuk and Adam Boley, with the project facilitated by Aisha Bushell.

The aim of the project is to help digital workers - those working in offices and those working from home - maintain their wellbeing and mindfulness whilst working. When working in an office, workers are often sitting down for long periods, and may not have particularly ergonomic workstations. Those working from home face these issues as well, and more besides - when working from home, it is all too easy for work time to spill over into personal time, with workers constantly in "work-mode", and unable to switch off from work. 

Thus, the website's main feature is an adjustable timer with options of for 2 minutes, 5 minutes, 10 minutes and 20 minutes that can be activated by a user. The timer allows users to take some time away from work to focus on their own wellbeing by drinking some water, doing some breathing exercises, or taking a short walk. The idea is to break up the user's day and try to prevent burnout by giving their brain a break. 


# User Experience

## User Stories


### Site Owner goals
- As site owners, we want to promote mindfulness and wellbeing
- As site owners, we want our site to be easy to use and navigate

### All Visitor Goals
- Visitors should be able to easily navigate the site's pages
- Visitors should be able to easily operate the timer and select from the pre-set timer options

### First Time Visitor Goals
- Visitors should be able to easily determine that the site's purpose is to provide tools to help them focus on their mindfulness and wellbeing at work
- Visitors should be able to easily register an account and log in to that account

### Returning Visitor Goals
- Returning visitors should be able to log in to their account
- Returning visitors should be able to reset their account password if they forget it
- Returning visitors should be able to delete their account if they desire
- Returning visitors should be able to update their profile

# Design
## Surface

### Colour Scheme

The website's chosen colour palette consists of blue, turquoise and green. These were chosen as they are pleasant to look at and may be associated with **peacefulness**, **stress relief**, **balance** and **emotional stability**.

Referring to the colour psychology websites [Very Well Mind](https://www.verywellmind.com/color-psychology-green-2795817) and [Graf1x](https://graf1x.com/color-psychology-emotion-meaning-poster/):  

**Blue** is associated with **calmness**, **serenity** and **peace**. It is calm, stress-relieving colour. Blue is often used to decorate offices because research has shown that people are more productive in blue rooms. 

**Green** is associated with **growth** and **health**. It is a **refreshing** and **peaceful** colour. Green is typically the colour of nature. It has a calming effect and is often considered a refreshing, relaxing colour. Green has been found to positively influence not only our emotions but our memories as well. Therefore, green has been employed to help users remember information.

**Turquoise** is a bright blue-green colour. Hence, it takes on the associations of both blue and green - the **calmness** of blue and the **growth** of green. Turquoise is also a bright, energetic colour much like **yellow**. Turquoise is associated with **freshness**,**mental clarity**,  **femininity**, **calmness**, **energy**, **serenity**, **creativity**, **balance** and **friendship**.

Our colour scheme, with hex codes:

![proposed-colour-scheme-1](/static/images/proposed-colour-scheme-1.png)


# Wireframes

The Balsamiq Wireframes app was used to create the initial wireframes and update them through the creation of the project. Wireframes were created for each page, with full-size versions for desktops and reduced-size versions for tablets and smartphones.

![home-page-pc](/static/wireframes/home-page-pc.png)

[Smartphone and tablet version](/static/wireframes/home-page-tablet-and-phone.png)

![timers-pc](/static/wireframes/timers-pc.png)

[Smartphone and tablet version](/static/wireframes/timers-tablet-and-phone.png)

![register-pc](/static/wireframes/register-pc.png)

[Smartphone and tablet version](/static/wireframes/register-tablet-and-phone.png)

![login-pc](/static/wireframes/login-pc.png)

[Smartphone and tablet version](/static/wireframes/login-tablet-and-phone.png)

![resources-pc](/static/wireframes/resources-pc.png)

[Smartphone and tablet version](/static/wireframes/resources-tablet-and-phone.png)



# Technologies

[Github](https://github.com/): Adam Boley's Github was used to host the main project files and folders. Other team members then forked to their repositories. 

[Gitpod](https://gitpod.com/): Most team members used the Gitpod IDE to create and edit the project files. Other team members preferred Visual Studio Code.

[Flask](https://palletsprojects.com/p/flask/): Flask was used to create a framework for the project.

[Flask User](https://flask-user.readthedocs.io/en/latest/): Flask User was used to create the registration and login functionality.

[Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/5.1/getting-started/introduction/): Bootstrap was used to provide a framework for the project

[Heroku](https://www.heroku.com/): Heroku was used to deploy the application

[MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/): MongoDB was used to provide the database instance for the project, and to store user profiles

[Slack](https://slack.com/intl/en-gb/): Slack was used to communicate and coordinate the actions of team members, share screenshots, and join video calls to discuss the project

[Google Docs](https://www.google.com/docs/about/): Google Docs was used to create and edit a shared document to note down ideas. 


# Testing

## Manual Testing

## Testing Site Owner Goals
- The site itself serves to promote mindfulness and wellbeing
- The resources page allows users to access other mindfulness and well-being resources
- The site's navigation is built on modern User Design principles that allow for easy navigation

## Testing All Visitor Goals
- The navigation bar in the header allows for easy and intuitive navigation
- The timer's operation is simple and intuitive

## Testing First Time Visitor Goals
- The purpose of the site is easily discernable
- Account creation is simple and intuitive

## Testing Returning Visitor Goals
- Account login is simple and intuitive
- Password reset is easily accomplished
- Account deletion is easily accomplished
- Users can easily update their profile

## Validation Testing


# Deployment

## Local Deployment

To run this project locally make sure you have installed the following:

- an IDE of your choice (such as Gitpod, VS Code, etc.)
- have the following installed:
    - [Git](https://git-scm.com/)
    - [Python3](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
    - [PIP](https://pypi.org/project/pip/)

### Clone the GitHub Repository

To clone this project and run locally please follow the below steps:
1. Login into GitHub with your account
2. Go to the [project repository](https://github.com/AdamBoley/January-2022-Hackathon)
3. If using Gitpod click on the "Code" button (located next to the green "Gitpod" button)
4. From the dropdown menu copy the HTTPS URL
5. In your local IDE open the terminal
6. Change your working directory to the location where you want the cloned project saved
7. Type `git clone` and paste copied URL from Step 4
8. Press enter to create your local clone

### Install project dependencies
- Install project requirements by typing `pip install -r requirements.txt` in the terminal and pressing Enter

### Create a database on MongoDB

Register for a free account with [MongoDB](https://account.mongodb.com/account/register)

- Create a new Project and call it 'mindful timer'
- Create a Cluster, choose the free tier option and select your region
- Create a new database and call it 'mindfultimer_db'
- Create Collections named "user" and "session"

### Local deployment
- To run the project locally, in the terminal type `python3 app.py` and press Enter
- This will open a localhost address, which is provided in the terminal output
- Either copy and paste the URL into a new browser tab, or hover over it and click the link

### Deploy to Heroku

The website of this project requires back-end technologies such as a server, an application, and a database, so the website is deployed on [Heroku](https://www.heroku.com/), which is a cloud platform with a service supporting several programming languages, because GitHub Page can only host a static websites.

Before deploying the website to Heroku, there are three important steps to follow to make the application work in Heroku correctly.

1. Create `requirements.txt` file that contains the names of packages being used in Python. It is important to update the file if other packages or modules are required for installation during the project.
2. Create `Procfile` that contains the name of the application file so that Heroku knows what to run. Ensure it is formatted properly or deployment will fail.
3. Push them into GitHub.

Once above steps have been followed the website can be deployed. Please find the steps of the deployment in Heroku:

1. Create an account in [Heroku](https://signup.heroku.com/login)
2. Click **New** & **Create new app** to create a new app
3. Put an app name, which must be unique, choose a region and click create app
4. Go to **Deploy** section and click **Connect to GitHub**
5. Search for the repository by the repository name and connect it
6. Before clicking Enable Automatic Deploys, hidden variables such as IP address, PORT, SECRET_KEY, MONGO_URI and MONGO_DATABASE need to be recorded in Heroku. Go to **Settings**, click **Reveal Config Vars** and fill out necessary keys and values. 
7. Once all the hidden variables are recorded, then click **Enable Automatic Deploys** and click **Deploy Branch** (Main should be selected unless you want other branches to be deployed).
8. When the app is deployed by Heroku correctly, there is a confirmation message and you can access the app.

**Note**<br>
*It is important NOT to set `debug=True` when deploying the website.*


# Credits

## Acknowledgements

The team: 
- [Naoise Gaffney](https://github.com/NaoiseGaffney)

- [Marina Pavlovic](https://github.com/FruitbatM)

- [Goran Kuzma](https://github.com/kuzGo)

- [Eva Kuk](https://github.com/Eva-Kuk)

- [Adam Boley](https://github.com/AdamBoley)

Our Facilitator, Aisha Bushell

Commit message:

add resources to Acknowledgements section, and add iPhone sound bug

README.md, after:

# Project: Code Institute January 2022 Hackathon with SODA Social: Mindfulness and Wellbeing

![](static/images/jan-2022-hackathon-image.png)

# Team: 09

# Table of Contents

## Introduction

This website is a project for Code Institute's January 2022 Hackathon, hosted in collaboration with digital recruitment firm SODA and their networking event SODA Social. The theme of the Hackathon was mindfulness and wellbeing in the workplace. 

The website was created by Naoise Gaffney, Marina Pavlovic, Goran Kuzma, Eva Kuk and Adam Boley, with the project facilitated by Aisha Bushell.

The aim of the project is to help digital workers - those working in offices and those working from home - maintain their wellbeing and mindfulness whilst working. When working in an office, workers are often sitting down for long periods, and may not have particularly ergonomic workstations. Those working from home face these issues as well, and more besides - when working from home, it is all too easy for work time to spill over into personal time, with workers constantly in "work-mode", and unable to switch off from work. 

Thus, the website's main feature is an adjustable timer with options of for 2 minutes, 5 minutes, 10 minutes and 20 minutes that can be activated by a user. The timer allows users to take some time away from work to focus on their own wellbeing by drinking some water, doing some breathing exercises, or taking a short walk. The idea is to break up the user's day and try to prevent burnout by giving their brain a break. 


# User Experience

## User Stories


### Site Owner goals
- As site owners, we want to promote mindfulness and wellbeing
- As site owners, we want our site to be easy to use and navigate

### All Visitor Goals
- Visitors should be able to easily navigate the site's pages
- Visitors should be able to easily operate the timer and select from the pre-set timer options

### First Time Visitor Goals
- Visitors should be able to easily determine that the site's purpose is to provide tools to help them focus on their mindfulness and wellbeing at work
- Visitors should be able to easily register an account and log in to that account

### Returning Visitor Goals
- Returning visitors should be able to log in to their account
- Returning visitors should be able to reset their account password if they forget it
- Returning visitors should be able to delete their account if they desire
- Returning visitors should be able to update their profile

# Design
## Surface

### Colour Scheme

The website's chosen colour palette consists of blue, turquoise and green. These were chosen as they are pleasant to look at and may be associated with **peacefulness**, **stress relief**, **balance** and **emotional stability**.

Referring to the colour psychology websites [Very Well Mind](https://www.verywellmind.com/color-psychology-green-2795817) and [Graf1x](https://graf1x.com/color-psychology-emotion-meaning-poster/):  

**Blue** is associated with **calmness**, **serenity** and **peace**. It is calm, stress-relieving colour. Blue is often used to decorate offices because research has shown that people are more productive in blue rooms. 

**Green** is associated with **growth** and **health**. It is a **refreshing** and **peaceful** colour. Green is typically the colour of nature. It has a calming effect and is often considered a refreshing, relaxing colour. Green has been found to positively influence not only our emotions but our memories as well. Therefore, green has been employed to help users remember information.

**Turquoise** is a bright blue-green colour. Hence, it takes on the associations of both blue and green - the **calmness** of blue and the **growth** of green. Turquoise is also a bright, energetic colour much like **yellow**. Turquoise is associated with **freshness**,**mental clarity**,  **femininity**, **calmness**, **energy**, **serenity**, **creativity**, **balance** and **friendship**.

Our colour scheme, with hex codes:

![proposed-colour-scheme-1](/static/images/proposed-colour-scheme-1.png)


# Wireframes

The Balsamiq Wireframes app was used to create the initial wireframes and update them through the creation of the project. Wireframes were created for each page, with full-size versions for desktops and reduced-size versions for tablets and smartphones.

![home-page-pc](/static/wireframes/home-page-pc.png)

[Smartphone and tablet version](/static/wireframes/home-page-tablet-and-phone.png)

![timers-pc](/static/wireframes/timers-pc.png)

[Smartphone and tablet version](/static/wireframes/timers-tablet-and-phone.png)

![register-pc](/static/wireframes/register-pc.png)

[Smartphone and tablet version](/static/wireframes/register-tablet-and-phone.png)

![login-pc](/static/wireframes/login-pc.png)

[Smartphone and tablet version](/static/wireframes/login-tablet-and-phone.png)

![resources-pc](/static/wireframes/resources-pc.png)

[Smartphone and tablet version](/static/wireframes/resources-tablet-and-phone.png)



# Technologies

[Github](https://github.com/): Adam Boley's Github was used to host the main project files and folders. Other team members then forked to their repositories. 

[Gitpod](https://gitpod.com/): Most team members used the Gitpod IDE to create and edit the project files. Other team members preferred Visual Studio Code.

[Flask](https://palletsprojects.com/p/flask/): Flask was used to create a framework for the project.

[Flask User](https://flask-user.readthedocs.io/en/latest/): Flask User was used to create the registration and login functionality.

[Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/5.1/getting-started/introduction/): Bootstrap was used to provide a framework for the project

[Heroku](https://www.heroku.com/): Heroku was used to deploy the application

[MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/): MongoDB was used to provide the database instance for the project, and to store user profiles

[Slack](https://slack.com/intl/en-gb/): Slack was used to communicate and coordinate the actions of team members, share screenshots, and join video calls to discuss the project

[Google Docs](https://www.google.com/docs/about/): Google Docs was used to create and edit a shared document to note down ideas. 


# Testing

## Manual Testing

## Testing Site Owner Goals
- The site itself serves to promote mindfulness and wellbeing
- The resources page allows users to access other mindfulness and well-being resources
- The site's navigation is built on modern User Design principles that allow for easy navigation

## Testing All Visitor Goals
- The navigation bar in the header allows for easy and intuitive navigation
- The timer's operation is simple and intuitive

## Testing First Time Visitor Goals
- The purpose of the site is easily discernable
- Account creation is simple and intuitive

## Testing Returning Visitor Goals
- Account login is simple and intuitive
- Password reset is easily accomplished
- Account deletion is easily accomplished
- Users can easily update their profile

## Validation Testing

## Bugs 

During on-going testing, one team member accessed the website on their iPhone and found that the sound for the timer function does not work. 

Other team members access the website on their Android phones and reported that the sound did work. The cause of this discrepancy is unknown. 

# Deployment

## Local Deployment

To run this project locally make sure you have installed the following:

- an IDE of your choice (such as Gitpod, VS Code, etc.)
- have the following installed:
    - [Git](https://git-scm.com/)
    - [Python3](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
    - [PIP](https://pypi.org/project/pip/)

### Clone the GitHub Repository

To clone this project and run locally please follow the below steps:
1. Login into GitHub with your account
2. Go to the [project repository](https://github.com/AdamBoley/January-2022-Hackathon)
3. If using Gitpod click on the "Code" button (located next to the green "Gitpod" button)
4. From the dropdown menu copy the HTTPS URL
5. In your local IDE open the terminal
6. Change your working directory to the location where you want the cloned project saved
7. Type `git clone` and paste copied URL from Step 4
8. Press enter to create your local clone

### Install project dependencies
- Install project requirements by typing `pip install -r requirements.txt` in the terminal and pressing Enter

### Create a database on MongoDB

Register for a free account with [MongoDB](https://account.mongodb.com/account/register)

- Create a new Project and call it 'mindful timer'
- Create a Cluster, choose the free tier option and select your region
- Create a new database and call it 'mindfultimer_db'
- Create Collections named "user" and "session"

### Local deployment
- To run the project locally, in the terminal type `python3 app.py` and press Enter
- This will open a localhost address, which is provided in the terminal output
- Either copy and paste the URL into a new browser tab, or hover over it and click the link

### Deploy to Heroku

The website of this project requires back-end technologies such as a server, an application, and a database, so the website is deployed on [Heroku](https://www.heroku.com/), which is a cloud platform with a service supporting several programming languages, because GitHub Page can only host a static websites.

Before deploying the website to Heroku, there are three important steps to follow to make the application work in Heroku correctly.

1. Create `requirements.txt` file that contains the names of packages being used in Python. It is important to update the file if other packages or modules are required for installation during the project.
2. Create `Procfile` that contains the name of the application file so that Heroku knows what to run. Ensure it is formatted properly or deployment will fail.
3. Push them into GitHub.

Once above steps have been followed the website can be deployed. Please find the steps of the deployment in Heroku:

1. Create an account in [Heroku](https://signup.heroku.com/login)
2. Click **New** & **Create new app** to create a new app
3. Put an app name, which must be unique, choose a region and click create app
4. Go to **Deploy** section and click **Connect to GitHub**
5. Search for the repository by the repository name and connect it
6. Before clicking Enable Automatic Deploys, hidden variables such as IP address, PORT, SECRET_KEY, MONGO_URI and MONGO_DATABASE need to be recorded in Heroku. Go to **Settings**, click **Reveal Config Vars** and fill out necessary keys and values. 
7. Once all the hidden variables are recorded, then click **Enable Automatic Deploys** and click **Deploy Branch** (Main should be selected unless you want other branches to be deployed).
8. When the app is deployed by Heroku correctly, there is a confirmation message and you can access the app.

**Note**<br>
*It is important NOT to set `debug=True` when deploying the website.*


# Credits

## Resources

The following resources were used in the Resources page of the Mindful Timer website

[NHS mental health advice](https://www.nhs.uk/mental-health/self-help/tips-and-support/mindfulness/)

[The Human Condition](https://thehumancondition.com/)

[Active Wellness](https://www.activewellness.com/blog)

[Mindful](https://www.mindful.org/)

[Additude](https://www.additudemag.com/)

[Oxford Mindfullness](https://www.oxfordmindfulness.org/)

[Free Mindfulness](https://www.freemindfulness.org/welcome)

[The Wellness Society](https://thewellnesssociety.org/)

[Mindfulness for Teens](http://mindfulnessforteens.com/)

## Acknowledgements

The team: 
- [Naoise Gaffney](https://github.com/NaoiseGaffney)

- [Marina Pavlovic](https://github.com/FruitbatM)

- [Goran Kuzma](https://github.com/kuzGo)

- [Eva Kuk](https://github.com/Eva-Kuk)

- [Adam Boley](https://github.com/AdamBoley)

Our Facilitator, Aisha Bushell
